 
CSIT 265 AI RESEARCH PROJECT
Unlocking the Power of Sparse Electronic Health Records (EHR) Data in Developing Nations by Early Type 2 Diabetes Detection Using a Simple Logistic-Regression Model
 
Abstract
Type 2 diabetes is preventable when you detect it early, but in developing nations where patients have their records on paper, there is no way a nurse or doctor will figure out what disease might come. That is due to the lack of comprehensive use of electronic health records (EHR) or the fact that there are sparse patient records in paper form. This research paper uses the data set of the Dia Health dataset, which is a Bangladesh EHR dataset for diabetes prediction, using a simple AI logistic regression model to flag the risky patients who are on the verge of getting type 2 diabetes. This paper has detailed the whole pipeline of an AI project from loading the CSV patient records, managing the missing data of patients, to training the model by using 80% of the data and 20% to measure the accuracy of the trained model for precision. The logistic regression model that was created gives an outstanding precision of 84% with an ROC AUC percentage of 86%, which is 0.86, on patients for whom data were missing, highlighting that this model has high potential for handling even incomplete health records to predict their health status. This logistic regression model even checks that factors affect the most, like glucose and family hypertension, along with why some factors even show unexpected results, such as a negative coefficient from family diabetic history. Glucose emerged as a strong predictor of having β = 1.24, where BMI had β = 0.75 and family history had β = 0.50. These results which this model shows only uses the few essential feature such as ages, weight, height,  glucose, and simple yes/no question are enough even though some of the features are sometime missing, it shows promising result which is also suitable for developing nations where they can run such model in their phone or laptop ideally in the clinics in Nepal or low resourced in other different nations where AI-based tools are not readily available. At the same time, this model proves that developing nations should emphasize the EHR in their health system to record patient data for future use or prediction of their health.

Introduction
One of the top emerging health issues around the globe is Type 2 Diabetes mellitus, which is growing even faster in developing nations with demographic and lifestyle modifications (Hossain et al., 2024). When we talk about Bangladesh, it ranks globally top for adults to have Diabetes, which is about 13.1 million cases, where 61.5% were unaware that they had Diabetes, along with 35.2% taking regular treatment, and only 30.4% of them had controlled Diabetes (Hossain et al., 2022). According to the International diabetes Federation (2025), in Nepal, one of the six countries of the IDF SEA, 90 million people in the SEA region have diabetes, which will rise to 145 million by 2045. Nepal, at present, has 1.1 million total cases of Diabetes in adults, which is almost 6.3% of the total population. That is why Diabetes is a critical concern for the healthcare system in the future, which is why we need to open our eyes today. For the reduction of complications and healthcare burden, early detection and control of type 2 diabetes are important in these situations.
	
However, early detection interventions in developing countries encounter an important barrier: weak electronic health record (EHR) systems and limited health data. Many hospitals and clinics in low- and middle-income countries rely on paper-based systems or have rudimentary electronic systems, and patient data is often scattered and incomplete (Poly et al., 2022). In Nepal, there is no national EHR system; the real-time obtaining of patient information is complex, and health policy planning is significantly affected (Gauchan et al., 2022). Even where there are pilot EHR implementations, the digital data kept can be "thin and inconsistent," as demonstrated in a case study of a two-year EHR rollout in a Kathmandu hospital (Paudyal, s. 2019). All these show that there is a potential for using sparse EHR data in such an environment in such a way that limited data can yield something particularly important in the future. 

Due to the lack of electronically saved health records, many researchers have tried to show how data can detect diseases early, even if it is just a simple yes or no question. For example, A study held in Bangladesh introduced a diabetes prediction using direct questionnaires and basic vitals, just because EHR data are not readily available (Poly et al., 2022). Likewise, other work proposed a newly labeled diabetes dataset. It used a combination of machine learning techniques that could detect diabetes accuracy (0.7350) and AUC (0.832). However, the problem was insufficient labeled data and the presence of missing values in the case of diabetes prediction (Dutta et al., 2022). These examples show that researchers are actively looking for ways to use data available, whether sparse electronic health record entries or survey responses, to identify high-risk people from an early stage of any chronic disease.
	
In this research paper, I have investigated early flagging of high-risk diabetic patients using a simple logistic regression model on sparse data, mainly focusing on developing nations with missing data. We use the Dia Health dataset, which consists of a recent dataset of more than 5000+ Bangladeshi patients that has features of fundamental health indicators, medical history flags, and diabetes diagnosis indicators of patients, such as age, vital signs, a few lab measurements, and yes/no medical history questions. Using Python programming, I went theoretically and practically using this model, evaluating more than 20+ patients' handwritten data with a few missing features. However, I still got 90% of them correct. By doing so, I hope this will unlock the potential of Electronic Health Records to be implemented in developing nations to combat chronic diseases like Diabetes, tuberculosis, hypertension, COPD, CVDs, CKD, and more.

Literature Review
There is no doubt that many developing nations, either in South Asia ( Nepal, Bangladesh, Pakistan, Afghanistan…), Southeast Asia (Cambodia, Myanmar...), or Sub-Saharan Africa (Nigeria, Ethiopia…), have unique healthcare data challenges and opportunities that have not been explored yet. Three pieces of literature highlight the area that needs to be worked on initially. 

Paudyal (2019) observed that the transition from paper-based hospital report to electronic one in low settings has been slow, with enormous challenges. Moreover, he also outlined that implementing a private Nepal Hospital-based EHR comes with several barriers, like poor leadership of the management team, staff reluctance, IT-related problems, and system maintenance. EHR implementation is worthwhile because of the data it will keep on record, making it possible to pave the way for digital improvement. According to Farhud ( 2021),  many low- and middle-income countries still "do not have access to the latest technologies" in healthcare, even when digital tools exist in such countries. Therefore, Crucial information about the patient's health has often been missed or delayed, which directly complicates the process of early disease prediction and preventive screening (Gauchan et al., 2022). This finding shows us how increasing the utility of sparse HER data is necessary.

Diabetes is one of the health conditions that is predictive, with extraordinarily little data to raise a flag. That is why implementing AI in this low-data environment is feasible. Many researchers have pointed toward EHR and its power to revolutionize the health sector. For instance, Polu et al. (2022) show how simple questionnaires on the basic health vitals at Bangladeshi Hospital with their AI-integrated diabetes prediction model. Those researchers found that the prominent key roles in diabetes prediction are age, BMI, family health, Family history, etc. They also included logistic regression, support vector machines, and random forests to do so. Taking away from this is that the fundamental question and a handful of biometrics are enough for AI to predict different chronic diseases. 

 I use logistic regression because of its simplicity; it has been used as a baseline for more advanced machine learning methods. While managing a hospital or clinic's Excel data or tabular data, logistic regression acts as an advanced machine learning model. One study of Wu et al. (2023) compared logistic regression with other machine learning models or algorithms like decision trees, random forests, XG Boost, neural networks, etc., for predicting early cognitive health status. Many other researchers have explicitly used logistic regression to flag the risk factors in EHR  data, even though their main goal was to use a more advanced algorithm (Guru et al., 2023). 

This literature suggests the potential of Electronic Health Records in developing nations with incomplete digital health records for predicting early-stage diseases. Initial work on saving data, even though minimal, has outstanding possibilities in the future. Doing so, choosing the right algorithm or model is quite important. In our condition, i.e., the developing nations should start with simpler interpretable models like logistic regression, which will have no limitation while overseeing the missing data of patients for flagging the risk.

Methodology
In this research on how a developing nation should act on saving patient data with the help of EHR, this logistic regression model has coded with machine learning pipeline that uses the Dia Health dataset (Diabetes_Final_Data_V2.csv) of Bangladeshi Patients along with the logistic regression model to prove how powerful a simple feature with missing data can be. The AI model that predicts diabetes was coded in Python (version 3.13.3), where I used Pandas to manage the data and data manipulation, especially managing the tabular datasets of Diahealth. Moreover, I use scikit-learn in my code to oversee the missing data, normalize the feature scale so that every feature, like age, weight, height, etc., remains at the same level, and also train the whole model for balancing performance. Therefore, the whole model predict_diabetes.py loads the data first, preprocesses the data, trains the model on what to do and do not, and then takes the user input to output if the user has diabetes.

SOURCE OF DATA AND ITS FEATURES
Dia Health of Bangladesh has published a dataset of Type 2 diabetes prediction as a CSV file named Diabetes_Final_Data_V2.csv in 2024. That file consists of almost 5,437 patients' records from Bangladesh who are either diabetic or non-diabetic patients. The data was classified into two categories, i.e., Biometric feature, which includes the numerical value of patients' data like age, height, weight, etc., and the other one is Health flaggers or questionnaires (yes/no).
Below is the table that shows this metric and its description, along with the units it being taken to predict Type 2 diabetes.
Type	Features	Descriptions

  BIOMETRIC FEATURES	Age	Patient age in (years)
	Pulse rate	Resting Heart rate (BPM)
	Systolic BP	Systolic blood pressure (mmHg)
	Diastolic BP	Diastolic blood pressure (mmHg)
	Glucose level	Fasting Blood Sugar (mmol/L)
	Height	Height in meter (m)
	Weight 	Weight in Kilogram (kg)
	BMI	Body Mass Index (Kg/m^2)

Type 	Features	Descriptions
  Health Flags	Gender	 1:male        2:female
	Parent diabetic history	 1:Yes           2:NO
	Hypertensive 	 1:diagnosed      2:NO
	Family history of hypertension	 1:Yes           2:NO
	Cardiovascular disease	 1:Yes           2:NO
	Stroke	 1:family stroke history 2: NO

Main Target	
Diabetic	1: Diagnosed with diabetes
          2:Non-diabetic
Tables 1 and 2: Summarize the features from the Dia Health dataset.
Loading and Encoding the Dataset: In the coding, the model used Pandas Data Frame to manage the CSV data file and then translated the human-readable data into machine language form. For instance changing the biometric feature like "Male" and "Female" into (1) or (0) respectively and every "YES/No" to "1 and 0" which determines the health flags like family history of diabetes, hypertension, or the patient's diabetic status {['gender'].map({'Male': 1, 'Female': 0}).fillna(0)}. Moreover, any missing data is treated as NO One can easily skip that feature they do not know. 

Overseeing the missing data: In a developing nation where data is sparse, much data could be missing. That is why to tackle the inevitable gaps in biometric measurement such as missing Blood pressure, height, weight, or blood glucose,  the blank column used the median imputation simply using the scikit-learns imputer = SimpleImputer(strategy='median') where each missing boxes in file filled by the column median which is also the median of the particular country or group the data that are been taken. 

Scaling the Feature: After inputting all the missing values in the column, all the features were standardized using the standardization technique in Python. In simple terms, Scikit-learn helps to transform all the biometric information to a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1. It is essential to rescale because of the unit difference in biometrics; if scaling is not done, one of the units might dominate the other and show a false result. Scaling is not done in health flag questionnaires because it has already been turned into yes and no, which is in 0/1 flags. 

Train-Test and Split: The Diahealth data are being split into 80/20, where 80% of the patients' data are used for training the logistic regression model, and the remaining 20% is used to assess the model to make sure that the set keeps a 6% diabetes rate. I fixed a random seed so that every time the split is the same when the code runs. Finally, the logistic regression model is train with LogisticRegression( solver=’libliner', class_weight =' balanced', max_iter = 1000) where' libliner' choose the best algorithm that fits the logistic regression, class_weight =' balanced' help to balance the overall prediction since only 6% of tested data are diabetic so algorithm might cheat the majority of time which is now balanced. 

Model evaluation: I have evaluated the model on four different matrices, such as Accuracy, Receiver Operating Characteristics (ROC), Area Under the Curve (AUC), sensitivity, and specificity, along with a confusion matrix. All these metrics were calculated using a simple formula, which is shown in the table below, and this model shows a promising result for predicting Type 2 diabetes. 

To conclude, examining all the methods and metrics together, this logistic regression model is a good trade-off between the two extremes of patients and non-patients. This model is good enough for a clinical screening tool in a resource-limited clinic, especially in developing nations.

Result
 This AI-driven model's accuracy is 77.94%, which means it is correct but can give errors on minority classes while testing. ROC AUC of this model is 0.812, which means that the model will flag high-risk patients 81% of the time. Similarly, sensitivity is 65.5 %, which means this model catches about two out of every three actual diabetes cases, and that is critical for ensuring that most of the patients who need follow-up testing actually receive a flag. Specificity is 78.7 %, which means it gets it right that roughly eight out of ten healthy people are healthy.

  Metrices	Formula	Success
  Accuracy	(TP+TN) / N	77.94%
	ROC AUC		0.812   =>  81.2%
	Sensitivity	TP / (TP + FN)	
	 0.656  =>  65.6%

	Specificity	TN / (TN + FP)	
    0.787  =>   78.7%

 The table examined the multiple complementary metrics and the model values.
 At the same time, I added the confusion matrix with a simple formula since it is an essential tool in evaluation, mainly in medical screening, as it tells exactly where my model succeeds and where it fails to predict. Out of 1088 test samples:
		•	True negatives (TN, non-diabetic correctly identified are 806 )
		•	False positives (FP, non-diabetic incorrectly flagged as diabetic are 218 )
		•	False negatives (FN, diabetic missed by the model are 22 )
		•	True positives (TP, diabetic correctly identified are 42.)

Diabetic	Predicted NO	Predicted YES
Actually Non-Diabetic	806 (TN)	218 (FP)
Actual Diabetic	22 (FN)	42 (TP)
The table that shows the number of patients evaluated (20% of the total data) is used for testing.

Prediction of New Patients through this Model: To demonstrate this model, I took the actual human data of my parents with the following health profile, i.e., both Biometric and Health Flag questions. A 40-year-old female, with a pulse rate of 80 bpm, has systolic and diastolic BP of 150/95 (hypertensive), a fasting glucose level of 12.5 mmol/L, height in meters 1.62m, weight in kilograms 85kg, a BMI of 32.4, with a known family history and current health situation. After we put all this value into the model, we will check for the missing value, and it will input the median of the column if it is missing. Then, the logistic regression model will display the possibility of an individual having diabetes. The possibility of having diabetes from the above details comes to 92.6%, which will then be compared with the threshold, which went to an exceedingly high positive difference, so she needs to seek medical attention as soon as possible. The result comes to 20.5% when compared with the threshold of 30%, which comes to a negative difference, and perhaps the individual should focus more on lifestyle.

 Discussion 
The model uses the Dia Health dataset of 5000+ individuals and achieved an ROC AUC of 0.812, which shows that this model has exceptionally good screening efficiency despite relying on 14 distinct categories of features from individuals. Also, when 20% of the rest of the tested data is used to check the accuracy of the model trained from the other 80%, the model achieves 77.94% accuracy, which means 8 out of 10 testing sets might be wrong if the user checks for their diabetic condition. 
Similarly, the confusion table tells a lot about where this model stands since it breaks down everything into four categories after evaluating 20 % of the data, which is almost 1088 individuals, that were left for testing before the model was trained. The model correctly declared that 806 were healthy individuals, 22 individuals who had diabetes were missing, 42 people with diabetes were correctly identified, and 218 individuals were incorrectly flagged as people with diabetes. From this, we derived a sensitivity of 65.6%, which aims to detect two-thirds of actual diabetes cases, along with a specificity of 78.7%, which is nearly 4 out of 5 healthy patients. I have lower sensitivity because I have less than 20% of diabetic data for training the model. Suppose we have good data on individuals who are half or almost half diabetic. In that case, it is possible to gain higher accuracy and sensitivity to predict the person’s diabetic condition now or in the future. 
In developing nations where there is limited data, this model works outstandingly because it has ROC AUC above 0.8, which tells us that even if the data or input are sparse, the model still has enough capability of predicting. Meanwhile, logistic regression, or simple AI, has potential in developing nation clinics to gradually develop and tailor their risk predictor without needing a more extensive dataset or advanced computational infrastructure. 
Limitations and challenges

While there are advantages to using the logistic regression model for early diabetes screening with minimal data, several limitations in both practical and methodological perspectives need to be focused on later. The first one is Data quality for this model. Since it is made from the data of South Asia, the model data will need to be changed according to the nations for better performance. Also, there can be errors in the data that is used to train this model. Other features that impact the result of having or predicting diabetes are diet, exercise, and the socioeconomic status of the individual. 

The other limitation is threshold selection, since I have selected 0.30 as a threshold, which might vary according to the nation or clinics, since the threshold favors sensitivity, i.e., to catch diabetics. I took the CSV file from 2024, which might not work after 5 years, since the community health profile might change the result. And changes in people’s diets, public health interventions, and demographic shifts are sufficient to change the risk of diabetes. So, one needs to maintain the data regularly and know a little about data science to run this model accurately.

To conclude all this discussion, I feel this type of model should not be judged in terms of AUC; what might need to be focused on is how impactful this kind of model will be in developing nations with low budgets and low settings to set up these processes. Logistic regression is quite simple: anyone in a clinic can figure out the workflow without employing a full-time AI expert to manage it. What if people of developed nations move or live in a developing nation like Nepal or another low-income setting? That is why we need to be very mindful of such ethical things. 

Ethical Consideration 
When deploying this type of AI-driven Prediction model in a low-level, low-setting environment or a nation, several ethical and social considerations must be addressed regarding how technology has been used in public responsibly and equitably. The first thing that needs to be considered is bias and fairness; My AI logistic regression model is trained on the DIA health Bangladesh database, which has not been classified on the basis of which those data are being taken. That is why people who know these kinds of prediction models in Nepal will not directly work well since the training data is collected from maybe some wealthier patients or individuals of different castes or genders. Therefore, when such biases exist in AI models which inequality exists in the community (Dankwa‐Mullan, 2024).

Privacy of the data and trust in the model or data management can be sensitive here. Clinics also need to keep their data safe, through encryption or a trusted cloud service, so that patients can trust that they can provide honest information. If people are concerned that their health information is going to be shared inappropriately or leaked, or misused in some way, then people aren’t going to be part of the system, and the system falls apart. At the same time, the Patient should also be aware that the note will show their health. If they are a substantial risk, individuals should be aware of their health condition and go for follow-ups with their doctor. 

Accessibility is another thing that must be considered when working in developing nations with low budgets and low tech. Deploying such a model on everyone's phone could be the best idea since people in developing nations do not go to doctors unless it is an emergency or even a single regular checkup in a year. That’s why AI models like this must be accessible through an easier medium, and data records should be done through higher power or clinics. 

Recalibrating and Accounting are other significant factors for maintaining this model for peak performance or predictions since the data needs to be updated according to the change. Moreover,  pointing out the limitation to the one who is using this model also encourages them to question the odd prediction, which is needed so that users do not truly trust AI. Likewise, if the clinics have a network that manages this model, the right to get the data should be on the community that uses them, i.e., the right to share and update the data. To conclude, AI or Logistic regression is not a mystery box that will prevent users from getting disease; instead, people should use this model as a reference where they stand today and work on their physical health in case it shows a flag by the AI model. 

Conclusion
This research paper clearly shows how a sparse electronic health record (EHR) or health data can be the backbone for predicting early type 2 diabetes in low-resource developing nations using a simple logistic regression classifier. Using the Dia Health Bangladeshi Data set of more than 5000+ individuals, I have demonstrated that an AI model like logistic regression is enough to predict the diseases with an accuracy of 77.94%, which is quite impressive with just using the sparse data. The model achieves a ROC AUC of 0.812, which means that the model will flag high-risk patients 81% of the time. Similarly, sensitivity is 65.5 %, meaning this model catches about two out of every three diabetes cases. Specificity is 78.7 %, which means it gets it right that roughly eight out of ten healthy people are healthy. The top features that impact the result of having diabetes include high glucose, hypertension, etc.

Looking at this from the perspective of developing nations, this model can potentially identify high-risk patients unaware of diabetes in community clinics or rural villages. My main focus is to make people realize they need lifestyle counseling or medical treatment to address the disease before it worsens, which will ultimately reduce the complications and long-term costs. For example, a nurse in a rural village might enter the patient's age, weight, height, blood pressure, and family history. Then, the model that already knows the patient's previous data will present the risk score, allowing for preventive action before specialist or lengthy testing is necessary for the patient later on. 

Though I have used the Dia health dataset from Bangladesh, this method and methodology are relevant to all developing nations whose diabetes percentage is rising. A report has estimated that the prevalence of diabetes in Nepal is expected to increase from 4% in 2017 to  6.1%, which means that people will struggle with limited access to early screening (Shrestha et al., 2022). So AI models like this will be beneficial for early screening of diabetes, which is trained with minimal health data taken from the region the user belongs to. Meanwhile, I did this research not just to predict type 2 diabetes but to show how even sparse data could do. We can resemble models like this to predict different other chronic diseases like hypertension, Cardiovascular disease (CVD), Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD), COPD, and even Depression. Therefore, the result my model has given with just using 5000+ patients has gained an accuracy of 78%, which means that the data scientists of the developing nation, local health clinic, and hospital should sit together and work on small data to have a more meaningful change.


References
Hossain, M. J., Al-Mamun, M., & Islam, M. R. (2024). Diabetes mellitus, the fastest growing global public health concern: Early detection should be focused. Health science reports, 7(3), e2004. https://doi.org/10.1002/hsr2.2004
Hossain, M. B., Khan, M. N., Oldroyd, J. C., Rana, J., Magliago, D. J., Chowdhury, E. K., Karim, M. N., & Islam, R. M. (2022). Prevalence of, and risk factors for, diabetes and prediabetes in Bangladesh: Evidence from the national survey using a multilevel Poisson regression model with a robust variance. PLOS global public health, 2(6), e0000461. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0000461
International Diabetes Federation. (2025). Nepal. https://idf.org/our-network/regions-and-members/south-east-asia/members/nepal/
Poly, T. N., Islam, M. M., & Li, Y.-C. J. (2022). Early diabetes prediction: A comparative study using machine learning techniques. Studies in Health Technology and Informatics, 295, 409–413. https://doi.org/10.3233/SHTI220752
Gauchan, B., Sherchan, R., Tiwari, S., & Khadka, K. B. (2022). Preliminary considerations for electronic medical record (EMR) in the public hospitals of Gandaki province in Nepal. Journal of General Practice and Emergency Medicine of Nepal, 9(13), 52–55. https://doi.org/10.59284/jgpeman42Paudyal, S. (2019). Implementing an Electronic Health Record System at a Private Hospital in Nepal. https://www.preprints.org/manuscript/201910.0158/v1 
Dutta, A., Hasan, M. K., Ahmad, M., Awal, M. A., Islam, M. A., Masud, M., & Meshref, H. (2022). Early Prediction of Diabetes Using an Ensemble of Machine Learning Models. International journal of environmental research and public health, 19(19), 12378. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph191912378
Prama, T. T., Zaman, M., Sarker, F., & Mamun, K. A. (2024). Dia Health: A Bangladeshi dataset for type 2 diabetes prediction (Version 1) [Data set]. Mendeley Data. https://doi.org/10.17632/7m7555vgrn.1
Farhud, D. D., & Zokaei, S. (2021). Ethical Issues of Artificial Intelligence in Medicine and Healthcare. Iranian Journal of Public Health, 50(11), i–v. https://doi.org/10.18502/ijph.v50i11.7600
Wu, T., Wei, Y., Wu, J., Yi, B., & Li, H. (2023). Logistic regression technique is comparable to complex machine learning algorithms in predicting cognitive impairment related to post-intensive care syndrome. Scientific reports, 13(1), 2485. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-28421-6
Guru, J., Shashidhar, R., Gururaj, H. L., Ravi, V., Almeshari, M., & Alzamil, Y. (2023). Electronic Health Record (EHR) system development for study on EHR databased early prediction of diabetes using machine learning algorithms. The Open Bioinformatics Journal, 16, e187503622309010. https://doi.org/10.2174/18750362-v16-e230906-2023-15
Dankwa-Mullan I. (2024). Health Equity and Ethical Considerations in Using Artificial Intelligence in Public Health and Medicine. Preventing chronic disease, 21, E64. https://doi.org/10.5888/pcd21.240245
Shrestha, N., Karki, K., Poudyal, A., Aryal, K. K., Mahato, N. K., Gautam, N., Kc, D., Gyanwali, P., Dhimal, M., & Jha, A. K. (2022). Prevalence of diabetes mellitus and associated risk factors in Nepal: findings from a nationwide population-based survey. BMJ open, 12(2), e060750. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2022-060750
